With that done,
let's get back to some slides and
kind of talk about a very
brief History of the DevTools.
Did anybody develop websites
before we had any DevTools at all?
Does anybody develop back,
okay, so we got one.
So when you think about the things
that actually kinda come over the wire
that you might actually have access to,
like what we used to have was
just the raw HTML, right?
So we've had View page source for
a long time since the launch
of some of these old browsers.
But they're not interactive or
colored or attributes aren't applied,
CSS isn't applied,
it's just a big blob of text, right?
And so we had this, and
we actually did have a tool where we could
feedback information the other way before
we had console log because that's
obviously tied to the debugger.
We had alert statements,
which we still have today, right?
And so alert statements were great.
So you would put in an alert, and then you
would refresh your page and then boom it
would pop up this alert that's really
hard to get away and this worked, okay.
So you can see here like my
website says current postid is 17,
I've logged out my postid.
The problem with alert statements is
that they don't handle anything except
primitive values.
So the second you have any arrays or
objects,
you get the two string version
of the array or object.
And so you would get object.
And so then what you would do in
your debugging is you'd make a for
loop around the thing, right?
And you would do object keys, and
you would log each object key.
And so this is what we had for
quite a long time.
So it got me interested in,
when I was prepping this course,
the history of developer tools, how we got
from where we were to where we are today.
And so I made this brief history
of DevTools for the web,
which was kinda cool.
So the web launched, arguably, in 93, and
it had the view source where you could see
the HTML, and it had alert,
and those were what you had.
And then we had many years until
Netscape offered console log.
And so it actually didn't have a DevTool,
but it had a JavaScript console that you
could open in a new tab,
and you could see things.
Many, many years later,
Firefox releases firebug, which was like,
in my opinion the spiritual beginning
of all of this DevTool stuff.
It looked very much like Chrome DevTools
still look, it functioned similarly.
And this is 2006, and
we really kinda stayed on this track.
Google followed with their
own Chrome DevTools.
Eventually apps got bigger,
bundling started happening.
So source maps were created by a team
at Google at the time to help you,
kinda debug minified code or
transpiled code.
Eventually, we got new
panels like performance, and
then Firefox came out, and
they re imagined DevTools.
It was this big thing that
they did in 2017 where they
started from the beginning and
built their own DevTool.
I don't know if anybody remembers, but
had this really cool three JS style layout
where you could to rotate the website and
see layers, it's very cool.
And then eventually Edge adopts Chromium
moving to the kinda current Chrome is
essentially the standard across browsers.
And then I posted this on LinkedIn and
people got really mad.
Okay, so
then I re-edited it from the anger.
And I made a more proper history of
DevTools, which is the same thing,
with some additions that I
think are really important.
So in that era between a basic console
log and having an actual inspector,
there are actually quite more
fundamental changes that happen.
So I think first, before Firebug and
I didn't know this.
There was a person whose
last name is Venkman,
who built five really influential
community tools around Firefox that were
all about seeing sources or
console logging or step through debugging.
And they really were the kind of
the person who kinda idealized a lot of
the stuff,
which eventually became Firebug.
Similarly, and
then there's the HTTP traffic monitoring,
which we kind of take for
granted as part of the Chrome DevTools.
Those are actually standalone protocols,
right?
And so Charles Proxy,
I don't know if anybody's used it before.
You said you do a lot of network stuff,
came out totally not related to
the browser, but
it did allow you to intercept and
debug through all the network traffic
that happens on your computer.
There were more cool things like DOMi me,
DOM inspector,
which I never knew about
all before Firebug.
Everything else stays the exact same,
but I just missed a bunch of stuff.
So HTTP support and
a bunch of these cool experiments, and
I posted this to blue sky,
feeling very proud of myself.
And then people got even
more angry on blue sky.
So I missed a lot more things,
which I just wanna cover quickly to
give people credit for what's due.
I didn't know this,
Microsoft actually beats Mozilla having
the first consolely script debugger tool.
A tool I never heard about called
Microsoft Script Debugger,
which is a whole separate windows
application that you had to load that
would allow you to kind of console
log out things I had no idea.
We're talking 1998, Venkman, Charles
Proxy, DOMi all that stuff is cool.
Firefox also had a web developer toolbar,
which I actually did use, but
I forgot about.
So instead of being an app inspector,
is this really cool toolbar back when
web was fun, which would have all these
different buttons where you could see
all the scripts and things like that.
YSlow independently launched
their first page analyzer,
I don't know if anyone's used it before.
But you put in your URL, and
it runs a bunch of tests on it and
tells you know way
precursor to lighthouse.
Webkit launched their web inspector
very early on, I didn't know that.
Google, this company called Dynatrace
made the first like Ajax editor,
or remember when synchronous JavaScript
like Google Maps first came out.
They made this Ajax thing where you could
see what called what, all this cool stuff.
Google, I forgot, had a whole page speed
analyzer before that predates lighthouse.
Source maps the same,
performance panel cool.
Lighthouse came out in 2016,
a lot of this stuff is kinda similar,
except in 2018 I did wanna point out.
A lot of people said that these new tools,
these developer browsers, like Sizzy and
Polypane, has started launching
in around 2018, 2019, and
they definitely belong as
part of this story as well.
So I hope now that this multipage
list will stand as a pretty
good testament to the kind
of history of DevTool.
So we went from only view source and
console to all the tools
that we have today.
But I think an important thing is nobody
came off with this big genius work,
all these things build on each other.
And it was a lot of Microsoft,
a lot of Mozilla, a lot of Google,
all kind of working together to
provide these really great things.
This was Firebug, what year was it?
What did I say, Firebug is 2006.
And this looks pretty much
what we've got now, right?
I mean, you've got your console and
your HTML,
then it's got the DOM on the left and
the style on the right.
And I don't know, this is pretty cool,
2006 to now 2025, and
they really nailed it with
the way this thing looks.
It's very, very nice.